yeah so
we're about to get started with our next
conversation of the day
and we are going to bring on another
artist
that both tommy and myself have worked
closely with
i am so pleased to welcome water
shinalahari
morshan is an iranian kurdish media
artist activist and writer based in
brooklyn new york
morrison al-ahari is an activist who
uses computer modeling
3d scanning and digital fabrication
techniques to explore the intersection
of art and activism
inspired by concepts of collective
archiving and cultural contradiction
ahari's 3d printed sculptures and videos
challenge social and gender norms
she wants her work to respond to resist
and criticize the current political and
cultural situation
that is experienced on a daily basis her
work has been part of numerous
exhibitions
festivals and workshops at venues
throughout the world
some of them are new museum moma centaur
pompadou
venice biennale the architecture and the
museum
for argenvante kunst among
many others she's also the recipient of
the joan mitchell foundation
painters and sculptors grant and the sun
sundance institute
new frontier international fellowship
and the leading global thinkers of 2016
awarded by foreign policy magazine her
3d additivist manifesto video
is in the collection of sf moma and
recently she has been
awarded major commissions by the shed
rhizome
new museum whitney museum of american
art liverpool biennial
and fact and we're actually going to see
a presentation now from within one of
those commissions which i just mentioned
the whitney museum of american art
commissioned a hypertext narrative
for their art port and morshan used that
as a way to present work in her series
she who sees the unknown and the figure
which you will see
in this performance as we're about to
start is called the laughing snake
and we're gonna play the performance for
you now and we'll be in conversation
afterwards
enjoy she who saw all things in a
broadband earth
and beyond and knew what was to be known
she who had seen what there was and had
embraced
the otherness
she to whom the image come like a mirror
a display of crisis
and who dwelt together with the divine
becoming
she knows and sees the unknown and lays
them bare
she is the monstrous other the dark
goddess
the possessive gin the dividing persona
she restores myth and histories the
untold and the forgotten
that misread and uneven those
off and from the near east
[Music]
she is the laughing snake known as the
one mirrored
she's daughter to no warrior wife two
non-noblemen
mother to no hero she stands ruthless
yet rooted
the one displays the same elsewhere
[Music]
she's the destroyer of all occupiers
the killer of the people of no sky
capturing those with wings who do not
fly
putting out every fire in favor of her
own
flame
[Music]
her story is told at every edge of the
world
a jinn no one could elude one time into
the past
and one time into the future they prayed
you have created this monster now give
her her equal
but no equal was found to fight her
all eyes on her they held a mirror in
front of her
when she saw her reflection she burst
into laughter
she laughed for days and nights until
she died
i am 12 at school and in our theology
class our teacher tells us that if we
keep on not covering our hair
completely under the scarf on the last
judgment day
god will hang us from each strand of our
hair
and i have one of those disobedient
heads
with all my hair out i raised my hand to
say
i don't want to pray to a god that is
that cruel
and i will get suspended from school for
two days
and somehow for months and years since
then i keep imagining a scene
where god is that caterpillar in alice
in the wonderland
and it's the last judgment day and i'm
hung from
every single strand of my hair and god
says explain yourself
and i laugh hysterically to say i'm
afraid i can't explain myself
because i'm not myself sir
every once in a while we felt brave
enough to let the wind blow through our
hair
which would cause an arrest maybe some
hours of jail
maybe getting harassed or beaten by the
moral police
but we still did it and the universe
made an example of
us for being this faithful to its
[Music]
elements
i'm six in tehran my grandmother catches
me rubbing my vagina
on the sofa warm arm on the pillow on
the sole of
my foot on the edge of a bench in a
public park
and the steepest part of a rock at the
caspian sea
and my doll's head on the plane under
the blanket
and she tells me if i keep doing this a
snake will come out of my vagina
i do it more and more and more and every
time i do it
and there's no snake i know this is
yet another victory over a world i kept
at distance
one day i discovered that in english the
word virginity
can be used both for men and women in
farsi it's only used for women
and the loss of high men some women
would get hymen repair and surgery
before marriage so that they would bleed
when they have sex with their husband
for the first time
i lost my virginity at the age of 15. no
shame
i do not regret no shame
no regret no shame no regret
[Music]
all eyes on her they held a mirror in
front of her
when she saw her reflection within the
world she burst into laughter from the
image
them holding a mirror she laughed
hysterically for days and nights
until she died
and i will be standing on a stage and
there will be a ceremony
and i'll be raising my head and i will
see a lineup of hundreds
thousands millions of girls and it will
each hold a safety pin up to the air
and one girl will come forward to give
me my own
and she will whisper into my ear carry
this with you
everywhere you go and this will become
the weapon of my generation
and in farsi we call safety pin
sanjokofli
which translates to locking securing pen
and years later when i learn the word in
english
and i won't stop thinking about the
uncanny coincidence of
words and objects and our stories we
were too ashamed to share
and years later from this future none of
this will even be a thing
and won't this be our revolution
and won't this be our revolution laugh
at the revolution
unless it's our revolution
[Music]
i am 16 i am 17
i'm 18 i'm 19 i'm 20
i'm 21 i'm 22.
and please know that i'm just existing
walking around in the streets of tehran
taking the public taxi
standing in some line taking the bus
sitting down
somewhere and young boys middle-aged
fathers
old old grandpas casually
cat call me every single day to tell me
what a nice piece of i
am to tell me i want to you and
your mother to tell me you look like a
with that makeup
to tell me i can put my deck inside your
ass if you want to stay a virgin
and young boys middle-aged fathers old
old grandpas
casually
touch my lap and my breasts and my ass
rub their penis on
me in some crowded place follow me for
blocks at night forcing me to get their
number
and young boys middle-aged fathers old
old grandpas
casually
ask for directions and show their penis
in the car before driving off laughing
walk to me and whisper if you waited
right here at the bus station
i will come pick i will come back to
pick you up after dropping my daughter
he points out to his daughter sitting in
the car and she's my age
and young boys middle-aged fathers old
old grandpas casually
[Music]
make it to my nightmares my subconscious
somewhere deep in my soul and young boys
middle-aged fathers
old old grandpas casually repeat into
each other
and they will hold a mirror in front of
me in front of her
and i she will lock a safety pin to my
her collar
and i she will laugh while tears run
down my her face
and i she will immediately recall my her
grandmother
saying to befriend or conquer a jinn
always have a safety pin fastened to
your clothes
and at that very moment so many worlds
will collapse and the laughing snake and
i will become one
and we will be mirrored mirroring and
will appear to recede
into an infinite distance that is the
future
and won't we celebrate this diffracted
laugh at the future unless it's our
future
and i will walk out and i will be on the
bus and he will sit next to me
and he will slowly start rubbing his
elbow to my left breast
and he will look out the window like
nothing is happening
while doing it and i will take my safety
pin
out and i will calmly push it into his
leg and i will push it in
and i will push it in so much and so
hard and so
fiercely and and the more i push it in
the more his body falls apart and the
more i push it in the more he will
disappear
and the whole world will be watching and
he will be gone
and i will return to my body
and won't you turn around her image and
won't she turn around her
image and won't she turn around her
image
and won't she turn around her image and
won't she turn around her
image laugh at the image
unless it's our image
oh we're on air thank you so much
we're here thank you so much that was
really
beautiful i mean it's um maybe was it
the first time that you were performing
with a website
was that the first time yeah i'm not i'd
yeah i've performed like a little bit
here and there during like some of my
lectures but more of like
as i'm giving my lecture but and then i
actually did something for five year
works recently where
um i did like um another version of this
at my studio
but this is only the first time that i'm
doing it on a stage more as
a performance that
has that projection in the background
and i'm like um actually
you know going through the website
clicking on different words um
to perform it so yeah yeah thank you so
that
so that video um is also available on
at pioneerix.org slash broadcast i think
if we launched it
i don't know when we launched it martian
i know it's been like a really difficult
oh it's been it's been challenging to
figure out actually when that thing is
going to get launched i think it's out
i think it's out we're posted about it
today
and if you're interested in hearing more
about the concepts in the video
you know that's a a good place to kind
of see them archived
i think so yeah and just some um
background for anyone who might have
joined in the middle of the stream
um that was more sending
a reading live in front of her hypertext
narrative which was
a commission from the whitney museum of
american art and it is online
at the whitney museum's website in their
art port commission
section so we encourage you all to go
spend some time with that simulation as
well
and click through and explore your own
narrative
um and it was really special to see
mauritian actually there
inside the gray area theater with that
simulation being inside the simulation
for radical simulation
so i really appreciate you doing that
and maybe like to if you can start off
just by talking about some of the
choices you were making during the
performance like
did you have that path ahead of time or
what was that
sort of click through like for you as
you were performing
um yeah i kind of like sat down
and like created um a little bit of
a pattern to kind of follow because
there were sections that i found like
more interesting or important for me to
read and
as you mentioned this is a
kind of hypertext multi-choice
non-linear story so
what i presented was perhaps around
like 80 of it and so there's definitely
more to explore and there's sections
that i didn't go through
um um but yeah i kind of
made a little bit of purposeful decision
of language path to take
um yeah thanks a lot for sharing that
with us the
you know thematically it's really you
know difficult there
there are parts of it that are really
difficult to hear to listen to
um dealing with really kind of like
challenging subject matter
um really traumatic stuff um
there's a point in the at the end of the
piece where
you know some of it just seems like um
real uh kind of diuretic things that
that happen
to women on a on a on a daily basis
um and then then there's this point at
the end that seems kind of like
um a surreal kind of like uh resolution
of to this problem where you push your
your pin inside of this purse
this man's leg and they and they
dissolve and disappear
this is kind of like this will be a long
rant and and
you know trauma itself seems like a
um and ancestral trauma seems to be like
a large theme in a lot of your works
uh do you see these pieces as ways to
you know resolve those things or you
know maybe just start a conversation
for them how are you thinking about this
work in
relation to trauma yeah
thank you for that um that's a really
good question and
i think um you know when actually i
started working on this piece at the
same time that i started my residency
pioneer works
two summers ago and that was also around
the time that whitney
museum of american art had given me this
commission
i carried by a question paul
um and they you know gave me
the kind of like space and funding to
work on this piece as well
um and so writing it was very
challenging
because i'm talking about some stuff
that i've actually never
like talked about never written about um
talking about
you know like when the time i lost my
virginity where
like sexual desire at the same time
getting to know my body
so i was also very nervous about writing
about this stuff because
um it's still you know it'd be trouble
to talk about
those things you know within like the
iranian society
um obviously with my family i kind of
like i
told my mom i'm writing this piece and
i'm working on this piece and this is
what it's about
um so they're open about it
but um it was hard to kind of like write
about that from from
that side of it like this like society
that is gonna like be there
for that stuff but also um when the
campaign stuff was happening in the u.s
when it started
um i felt like it was very much focused
on
the issues of um
mostly like western dominantly like
women
and and those were the voices that were
mostly like amplified which
you know was was great in some way
because
it started a movement and then we needed
those voices
um but i i realized like how
women from different countries and
different backgrounds
and different races like are really
having like been
given perhaps a platform where their
voice hasn't been amplified in the same
way
so um working on this
body of work which is the unknown series
um and then the laughing snake is one of
the figures of it
and i kind of felt like this was an
opportunity to
talk about you know my experiences and
then this collective experience of like
women in iran and growing up in iran and
all these like really complex
relationships between your body and
sexuality
and sexual desire and then being in
this very like violently patriarchal
spaces where
you know purposefully i'm choosing like
really like exact words that you would
be told like walking around i'm not
exaggerating at all like it's just like
that common to just say those words to
as you like walk around in the streets
and that's your like
daily life experience the story of the
man coming to me
telling me to that he's gonna give me a
ride if i like wait for her after he
drops his daughter off that's real you
know um
so i use the opportunity to talk about
these issues to hopefully
talk about our experiences in some way
and yeah as you say
like perhaps through that process find
some
[Music]
yeah thanks thanks for that i was
curious um
i have something here that i wanted
[Laughter]
this was it this was a gift you left
when you um left the residency
at pioneer works and it makes an
appearance in your video
this thing yeah
the mask you're wearing can you tell us
about the mask that you're wearing
yeah well this one that i love had
pioneer was a version of it for a
performance
which has like the signs that are for um
this method called ram money for
illinois
which is is in arabic and and it's
it's basically the science and would be
used for people
um has you know this kind of like
practice in in in the art world
and uh like that one has both like signs
and
figures like outside lines but the one
that i'm wearing for this performance
um is another version of the very i have
it
alice man which is a talisman
power um so
when i did that performance you know
kind of like teaching the mask
um and uh
it's so weird like also talking about
masks and then every time i say mask now
it's like something else
in my head
maybe i should say a little bit about
the laughing snake because i don't think
like we actually like
i i have another chance to contextualize
like this work in terms of like
what is this what is laughing like what
is the walls
um would that be okay yeah please yeah
yeah and then i come back off to the
mirror and the mask from there
so i uh this she
unknown series is a work that i've been
working on for three and a half years
it's almost done i'm just working on
releasing an archive as the
last part of it now um but the work
itself focuses
on um monstrous uh female slash
genderless
uh figures from ancient uh
middle eastern uh stories that
um also are from mostly the islamic era
and uh the laughing snake is one of the
fears
that i focus on and i came across her
illustrations in a book called catawba
bolhan or the book of wonders
and then i searched for her story and
her story is that
she's you know this snake in a form of a
gin or like a monster that is
going through different towns and cities
and
eating all these animals and killing all
the people
and winning all these battles and no one
can do anything
uh about it um and until
some man comes out of a cave some old
man
and says that the only way to kill her
is to hold a mirror in front of her
and the story of holding a mirror in
front of um
any kind of powerful monstrous figure
you know is also known through other
like western
um stories of course like so
that that aspect of holding a mirror um
is kind of like a common story but what
happens
is that is medusa turned into
stone but with in the case of the
laughing snake when she sees
a mirror in front of her she starts
laughing from
seeing her reflection and she laughs for
days and nights
until she um basically dies from
laughter self-destructs from laughter
and in the tradition of this body of
workshops is the unknown for me
reading these stories and getting to
know these stories it's also been about
how do i turn around these power
structures right like thinking about the
man holding veneer
and her death not as a position of
weakness the laughter is not a position
of weakness but rather
a position of empowerment um so
as she laughs and self-destructs she
take over
this ownership back with this ownership
of her body and the reflection of her
body
um so obviously the mirror becomes a
very important
um symbol here something that i wanted
to play with
with the performance you know as i'm
performing you also see it kind of like
reflecting
um and um also it becomes something that
i keep like going back to
in the text so that's a little bit of a
context
about the the laughter and i also
use laughing as you know like a what
like a word that i keep coming back to
um or ways of life began finding power
within
different contexts within different
situations
you mentioned a few things in there that
i would love to talk about i want to get
into your research-based practice
because i know that's also a big part of
what you're working on now but before
that
you know this idea of dystopia and
monstrosity in your work
um and thinking about like monstrosity
as an alternative to whiteness
can you talk about like a little bit how
you use those concepts as sort of a way
to reclaim these narratives in your
practice
yeah i mean there's a long history of
you know feminism and feminist movements
within like thinking about the figure of
the monster within thinking about the
the figure of um you know um
also kind of the witch um
so these these figures which are like
historically
you know whenever it's about like
connected to like women known as always
like negative
or like um you know a witchy woman or
person or whatever
and so like as as something that is like
bad or negative or scary
and then through different movements and
like again as i said like feminist
movements
specifically uh there has been practices
of like
thinking about reconciling these things
and like thinking about again the
position of monstrosity
as a position that is not not negative
and
and even if it's negative in that
context we can use it as a way to claim
or reclaim
something um so within this i've been
very actually focused on the figure of
the gin
um or you know as some people might know
it
genie um but the jin also is this figure
is this creature that um has
you know a really big influence within
islamic cultures is talked about in the
quran
as a creature that is made of smokeless
fire that can make
decisions um like a humans it can be
your friend or your enemy
it has a will um and so for me it was
also really important to kind of like
come up with
some kind of you know this thing that i
talk about refiguration and
refiguring of not just figures from the
past for
another a re-imagination of other uh
possibilities of now in the future but
also refiguring
this image of um the
the cyborg as donna haraway puts it or
the monster or the witch again within
this very like western
context um and i felt like there's so
much
room into like thinking about jen as
something that is very specific to
islamic culture but really hasn't been
explored in any of these movements or
uh you know uh ways of like
from like activism or like or like
position
of power for women um and that's what i
really wanted to do
to kind of like find find my own voice
find our our own
kind of figures and refiguration because
having access to that and being able to
imagine something again beyond the
dominant western
figurations really do something else um
in terms of opening up possibilities in
terms of like building platforms and
communities around
these stories um and you know i hope
this body of worksheets is the unknown
uh which as you mentioned has been very
much
about research and finding these stories
can do that and that's also the archive
that i'm releasing um in coming
weeks um is uh is part of that
which is to give access to this
knowledge
in a also protected way that i mean
that's another whole
set of stories but yeah yeah i think oh
go ahead tommy
oh i'm sorry um yeah this this idea of
like owning your owning that knowledge
and
um and protecting that knowledge it
reminds me of this
this really cool thing i think you do i
really appreciate
um is that when you are creating
works and looking for support that
you're careful
that when these things are collected
that they're not finding their way
um into western institutions and you're
really looking
towards um you know making sure that
that that work isn't exploited
the way it has historically um
by these colonialist institutions i was
wondering like
maybe if you could speak a little bit
more about how
you find institutional support that is
you know more holistic and less kind of
like predatory
yeah i mean that has been a very
complicated long path you know that like
from my series material speculation isis
series started where i work on
reconstructing artifacts that were
destroyed by isis in 2015 in iraq
um and um i
kind of like after a while started to
like think about
what do i want to do with these
sculptures and what do i want to do with
their 3d models
um and one of the answers is that well i
don't want to give them to just like
some
institution in in north america or in
europe
um i don't want some like private
collector to own them so you know i've
never like sold any of those sculptures
or um i haven't given full access to all
the files
uh of the 3d models because i'm waiting
for the right right time where i can
like find an institution hopefully in
in in the middle east or yeah the right
institution
that i will feel ethically okay with
with
working with in that context um
another thing has been with in general
thinking about these ideas of digital
colonialism
a term that i've developed since 2015
thinking about
um the relationship between these
institutions western institutions and
technology
and uh what does ownership of digital
data mean
and what does it mean when we give
access
and what kind of access do we give or
when they have
access and they use it as their own
individualistic
kind of purpose or they make monetary
benefit from it and they
own the copyright of these like digital
data what does that mean
for us right um and within the archive
i'm also doing the same thing
i am you know i i thought about it for a
long time which is that
should i work with an institution that
give that that give
access you know basically to this
archive that will that will
become the platform for the archive and
i
talked to different people and you know
i decided that i just wanted to actually
post that on an individual like on a
website
on my own um so the ibm grant that i
have right now that i'm
working on the archive is for that um
and
actually you know i've come um i'm
working with
emily martinez who i should give a shout
out to because she also like worked with
me
uh she was the person who did all the
webgl and his development and design of
the
website with shiva suzy unknown the
piece that i just performed
and we're also working together um she
is
basically helping me with the
development of the website for the
archive as well
um so one the idea that i have
is to think about it as layers right so
if you speak english you can only have
access to certain
part of the website um and then if you
know arabic and farsi
you can basically unlock certain part of
the website
um and and you know you know we have to
come up with like ways that it can be
pressed
it's not translated translatable so it's
like image based
material they'd like to type um then
that will unlock different parts of the
archive that you can have access to
so sort of thinking about open source as
something that is not necessarily
always good as people might think about
you know there's always this like
fetishization of like open source and
access
but really how can we protect knowledge
um
so i have a whole like tag of
for all and then for us um
so these two you know is something that
i've been thinking a lot about
i think that's a really interesting
thread between your presentation and
stephanie's before
also because it's really important for
stephanie also to have that ownership
and have that autonomy over the data
because of the personal nature of it
i think it's really beautiful the way
this archive has evolved since we first
did
she who sees the unknown with huma in
transfer gallery all those years ago
and we had this sort of reading room
right in the front of the gallery
and the space for people to actually
engage with these research materials
and those were like books off your
bookshelf like they also had like a very
personal
sense that these were your materials
that this like kind of
practice of research was part of the
work
in such an an integral way that we we
wanted to give
space in the gallery and give space to
the audience for it
um and so it's cool to hear about how
you're thinking about
translating that into like a a legacy
interaction pattern with these kinds of
levels of access
and ownership around the data and
i'm curious uh in in some of your other
uh
iterations of the reading room if you
can talk a little bit about
the kinds of interactions people had
with those materials
and how that's sort of also informing
your work on the the
digital archive now yeah um
so that that's a great question because
the reading room as you said started at
transfer gallery so we are we were just
making like now a full
loop back at a lot of things um
and when i first presented it it was
like on
there was a you know section with the
books and there was a section with like
pdf um files that were like printed um
and then and uh there was like a whole
section
which was digital images on um ipads
and so that also kind of kept developing
the whole
idea of the uh the reading room becoming
also like a little bit bigger
more comfortable um at the last
exhibition that i had a
solo show uh for in um
in canada um at mckinsey art gallery we
actually
you know built like a really nice lounge
with
kind of persian style carpets and
pillows and people could come and hang
out
um and watching people
actually coming through and spending a
lot of time on that stuff
was really amazing because
you you never tell like any and it
really depends where
these places are and who the audience is
but like
um i was really surprised to see people
like
taking pictures and tagging the project
and
kind of like showing that through the
the month of different exhibitions
people actually spend time with the
material
so whenever also you make work that is
very like
cultural in culturally perhaps again
not familiar to the western audience in
that sense
um there is always this pressure on you
to
explain a lot you know like i i feel
like
um after a while i started to get like
really tired of being that cultural
ambassador or like feeling that
it is my responsibility to educate right
um one of the jokes that i would make
with
you know at some point with my friends
was that you know people would be like
oh have you seen like this
tv show from like 90s and i'm like no
and they're like how
like what and i'm like yes because i
didn't grow up in the us
and like the fact that you just assumed
that it's just
you know an american tv show so everyone
should know about it that's just like
weird to me
and so i would like tease my friends
being like do you know about blah blah
or do you know about this poet this like
iranian poet and um
and they're like no i'm like okay like
well this person is really important in
like the whole arab world or whatever
um so that that like kind of
idea of what knowledge is should be
known as is known if you don't know it
then like
you know maybe there is you're not up to
date with the world or whatever
so i kind of wanted to actually put some
some hopefully um maybe um
i don't know labor that we could share
with the audience but it's not just my
job to like
teach you about all these things so that
you if you don't know what a gen
is or like what it's influenced in islam
or like whatever it is then
maybe you won't understand everything
fully but for if you want to and if
you're interested in that
then you have to go and dig into the to
the library which
i'm doing also the labor of providing
but then we meet in the middle hopefully
and that's that's how i saw
it um so as this is the
digital archive um i
i see that again like i want to also
like think about as we talked about it
the protection of this knowledge
because i don't want one of these like
gen
beautiful illustrations to end up in
some shirts somewhere that someone like
sells or whatever without really
understanding the context and like not
not respecting or like honoring this
culture that
i think for a lot of us coming from uh
these these
cultures in west asia or south asia also
um really kind of you honor them uh for
most part you have a relationship with
these these things
um so that's another reason that i was
scared to give it all out um because of
that kind of
reappropriation and abuse of this kind
of material
i like that idea of like um you know
inviting the audience to also do some of
the work and
i want to talk a little bit about um the
role that activism plays in your
practice as well
and you know one of the ways that that
really manifests itself is in some of
these like sort of
round table or engagement events where
you have people like sitting around a
circle with you
and actually you know performing and
thinking through some of these ideas can
you talk a little bit about
activism in your practice and some of
those events
yeah so i have been really like
thinking about my work really as kind of
like art
activism for a long time i would say
that 12 13 years i know it's a work that
is now like
in everyone's bio or whatever but it's
really something that
was the reason that made me interested
in art
as a practice um and also like
i growing up in iran and kind of like
how politics is very like involved in
your daily life
um you go to any gathering you sit
around
anything politics is always the
conversation it like never
fails right in that sense um so it's
very embedded in
in our daily lives not just as something
we speak about but also as something
that we live with
and um so from the very beginning of
my interest to the art art practice was
to find ways that i can
kind of also um being involved with like
political topics
um and the more my work grew the more it
i found it important that it goes just
beyond the work
itself like okay making a video that
talks about a political
topic or like making um i don't know um
sculptural work like material
speculation that is directly you know
using 3d printing as a way to respond to
the destruction of
these artifacts by isis so
going um out of these like white
walls of the gallery or museum or the
art
object itself was something that i
started to like think about as
as a thing that was really important to
me but i also don't
personally i don't like political work
that is like too well so dry
um i i feel like for me it has to be
have
this like combination of poetics and
activism
and the narrative and you know layers
um so thinking about events
organizing community building uh the
reading room
um all that stuff was something that
became
important like lecturing even like
talking about things you know when i
started like writing and talking about
digital colonialism i mean
i've talked about it in like probably
more than 100
universities and institutions in in in
the last series
in the last like uh five years and you
know i always like see
especially with students like that this
like
bob kind of lights on in their head
where like they're like oh well i had
never thought about this oh wow like now
i can go and research this or like
whatever
so i kind of feel like i also think
about my work in that sense where
that is my teaching like i'm not right
now teaching at university but
that is how i think about the teaching a
part of my practice
which is also an extension of the
activism work that i want to do
to bring awareness to help students and
and in general the audience to ask
difficult questions especially when it
comes to technology
um because i feel like it's a space that
is still
so very much uh there are so many blurry
lines
and there's so much stuff that haven't
been written about
uh like only recently they're like
lawyers that are writing
and kind of like trying to discuss and
come up with solutions for digital
ownership of the 3d scan data like
that's a whole new world that
we didn't have to deal with in a similar
way like eight years ago
right um so as these new technologies
come to our lives and then as these
new technologies as also stephanie
mentioned gets used by these bigger
um institutions and as these uh you know
tech uh companies um
i think it also becomes more complex and
more important for us it's like artists
to
find ways that we um try to intervene
and interrupt these things and like
you know if you're giving lectures or
teaching classes or have any kind of
involvement with the younger generation
trying to kind of like help guide them
or like
show them or like make something that is
invisible visible to them
um for um rethinking or like
exploring these ideas that's something i
was kind of curious about
um was you're kind of
consistently at the forefront of these
technologies that people are using for
art you know
especially with you know 3d printing and
added additive
manufacturing um
we talked about this a little bit with
with stephanie and
you know um this the this idea that
you're
you're often like the producer director
and you're working with
um crafts people that are helping
produce your work
um there seems to be like a lot of like
talk about or like discussion
in your work about or like activism
uh in and around kind of colonial
politics
um there and
and it seems like technology is like
such a huge
part of of the work how do you see that
kind of like technology specifically
like fitting into like your
colonialist like activism politics
i mean um i think i would say like the
immediate answer is like by by
not just use it in a way that i'm told i
should lose that
you know i i did a residency for one
year right here
in the bay area where i am right now uh
in 2015.
at autodesk which is you know this huge
company some of you who are listening
might know about it but
who has created software like autocad
which is for architecture mostly or like
3d simulation or like
maya um uh and fusion
any other software right so i was at
this super like
tech heavy space i mean it was beautiful
and it's like most access i've
ever had in my life to any kind of
technology and a staff that was like
just ready to help
um but it was constantly like a weird
clash of um high tech
of all right like i have access to
everything i can make everything and
then these confuse like people who are
like what are you doing like we don't
understand what are you like working on
like
what is this thing or like why are you
3d printing so why are you not
you know i don't know cnc machining it
like what does this mean so
um that was like a really
eye-opening moment for me for my
practice because prior to that i had
never been into like a
super like tech heavy you know silicon
valley style space
um and to to be there and then to we had
like weekly
it was a residency program an artist
residency program within that
institution
and we had like weekly sessions
where like unlike summer like ibm we
weren't like really critically talking
about stuff you know
some guy would be like oh i'm 3d
printing a shoe
or like you know the other person was
like
i don't know building a chair or
something
so it's like it was really hard to kind
of be in that space and then talk about
a work like material speculation which
is like very loaded politically and then
i was like thinking about the poetics of
it why i'm 3d printing in resin with a
memory card inserted and
you know all these complications to it
and
not finding that that space at all like
a critical feedback space
um and then right after that coming to
somewhere like i-beam
which was amazing in sense of that
access to my colleagues and staff
members and
and people who were there that like
really understood technology critically
um obviously they didn't have the
million dollars 3d printers there
so it's always that like weird you know
kind of
either either or it's like rarely
institutions unfortunately have the two
because of just how hard it is to
survive in new york with
all this probably tech stuff um anyway
so i think for me it's kind of been
also like a learning path of how do you
maneuver these spaces um i obviously
want to like use the funding and money
of some of these institutions to make
work that i want to work like i don't
want to necessarily just like shy away
from it and be like
oh i don't want a residency at autodesk
because they also have a history of
you know simulating uh weapons and
things for the military right and that's
real
um and so yeah that's always a
complicated thing you just have to make
a lot of decisions
and sometimes saying no makes a lot of
sense and sometimes saying
yes but make sense so
it's always but that's back and forth
yeah
there's this interesting like subversive
thing that happens when you're
in dialogue with these companies
specifically in your work because you
know as you as you mentioned like why
make something out of resin that's
derived from
plastics that are derived from oil that
you know um
are in you know which is a material
which is obviously in conversation with
middle eastern politics and um
just a whole yeah history of violence
and bad stuff
yeah thanks um before we're almost at
our time we have just a few minutes left
but before we go i'd love to just take
one question from the audience
so chris coleman is wondering what the
advantages and contexts are when you're
doing the performance with your website
versus just having the website as the
sole
way of seeing the work
yeah um so you know i thought about kind
of like what does it mean
activate a space like a website
obviously like an audience member goes
and
does their own thing but um i
also some of you again here might know
that i come from
a creative writing background and that's
always been like really important
and uh kind of present in my work in
different videos and
vr work that i've made and in this case
like a web art piece
um and i've always loved just reading
you know like when you go to like a
poetry reading and
um you know it's like okay why a poet
comes
and like read the poet then i can just
read it
so i think it's it's it does
it's for me important to kind of like
find ways that i can like activate that
space
uh i'm beyond just like an audience
member being there and like clicking
through
this stuff and again this story is like
super personal
so um for me to perform it also like
feels like
uh an important part of the part of the
project
um and so yeah i've been kind of like
developing the performance
slowly and doing it this last time at
gray area was actually
um very empowering nice
it was really special that we have that
performance from you thank you so much
and yeah it's like all the figures
extend through all of these mediums also
right like it's it's a it's a 3d printed
sculpture it has a sculptural
installation
in the case of the laughing snake it
involves these mirrors or it's
a whole immersive experience when you
see this work and so it's one of the
many kind of ways that it presents
um as a whole piece
cool well tommy do you have any less
questions for morrison
should we head on over to the lounge oh
you're muted sorry
here we go um
yeah i'll see you see you in the lounge
around
okay so we're gonna wrap it up now we're
gonna jump into the lounges and continue
the conversation there
for those of you just joining us today
it's a fluid space
and it's just for you to explore new
connections so when you get in
it's just like entering a room full of
people you'll see a number of
conversations and you can join in or
listen in
we're gonna all be over there so feel
free to hop in
and chat um and yeah
share some of your key takeaways from
these talks and let's keep the
conversation going and we'll be back
in an hour with amelia winger bearskin
so thank you motorshin
thank you all it was such a pleasure to
talk to both of you
thanks great i love you all thank you
you